---
published: false
---
## Using Digital Collections as Data

Collections as Data has become very trendy as of late. As far as I understand it, it means providing access to online digital library collections in a way that facilitates programmatic research. Here at Wayne State, we have been busy redesigning our digital collections platform, both its front-end display as well as the back-end data that powers the website (its API). In doing so, we couldn’t help but be a bit inspired by the collections as data movement and see if we could work toward tilting our collections to harness some of those concepts. 

A bit of info on how our digital collections work. The front-end display (aka website) show alls the public-available image and digital resources from our repository. This data (metadata, rights statements, links to images, etc) all comes from our API. When a page loads, it queries the API for the associated data and after a bit of arranging, loads the page. These are two separate systems, each with unique ways of working. Users are free to use the front-end display to browse normally or to use the API to see all of our digital data that is inside our repository; the problem is that we had different ways of interacting with each. You might type in http://OUR_URL/item/ITEM_ID to see the web page and http://OUR_URL/WSUAPI/?functions[]=singleObjectPackage&PID=ITEM_ID to see the API data. For two systems that are tied together this is not very intuitive for anyone. And, if you are into the idea of Collections as Data, you have added a confusing layer for anyone who wants to use the larger metadata store underneath the digital collections. We had the idea that people who were interested in the API (and doing some programmatic research with our collections) would first navigate the website and get familiar with its content then switch to the API. Unfortunately, with the current setup, they would have to learn a completely new way of navigating with the API. This is where content-negotiation comes in.

As part of the HTTP standard (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_negotiation), content negotiation is the ability to ask for different representations of the same information by specifying its content-type. This could be something as simple as asking for HTML (text/html), PDF (application/pdf), or even a structured data like JSON (application/json). Remember that I said earlier that we were rebuilding our API and our front-end display. We had determined that, regardless of its the API or the website, we were basically showing the same information to people just in display formats. Therefore, it made a lot of sense to make the systems mirror each other. Now, to be clear, the ultimate use of content-negotiation might have been to merge the two. If you wanted structured data (normally available from an API), you'd ask for JSON; if you wanted a webpage with arranged data, you'd ask for HTML. We're unfortunately not there yet. We need two different systems because they accomplish more than just what I've described (aka, there's complications). But, a nice middle ground, and one to gets us closer to providing researchers accesss to our collections as data, is to make sure the API and the front-end do the same thing with the same URL patterns.



More resources:
http://digitalpreservation.gov/meetings/dcs16/AsDataExecutiveSummary_final.pdf
http://digitalpreservation.gov/meetings/dcs16/tpadilla_OnaCollectionsasDataImperative_final.pdf
